update sqrt-decomp module (#1924)
cpinitiative/usaco-guide: content/5_Plat/Sqrt.mdx

<!-- partitioning into sqrt blocks (each block can have some sort of data structure ...)
 -->

We partition the array into blocks of size $\texttt{blocksz}=\lfloor \sqrt{N} \rfloor$. For each block, there exists a
corresponding `update` and `query` operation.

**Update Queries:** $\mathcal{O}(1)$

To update an element at location $x$, first find the corresponding block using

> the formula $\frac{x}{\texttt{blocksz}}$, where

Reviewer: > the formula $\frac{x}{\texttt{blocksz}}$, where

Where's the rest of this sentence?

Then apply the corresponding
difference between the element currently stored at $x$ and the element we want
to change it to.

**Sum Queries:** $\mathcal{O}(\sqrt{N})$

To perform a sum query from $[0\ldots r]$, calculate

$$
\sum_{i = 0}^{R-1} \texttt{blocks}[i] + \sum_{R \cdot \texttt{blocksz}}^r \texttt{nums}[i]
$$

where $\texttt{blocks}[i]$ represents the total sum of the $i$-th block and the
$i$-th block represents the sum of the elements from the range

> $[i\sqrt{N},{(i + 1)}\sqrt{N})$, and $R$ represents

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$[i\sqrt{N},{(i + 1)}\sqrt{N})$, and 
```

> $R=\frac{r}{\texttt{blocksz}}$.

Reviewer: I think you should rather explicitly show the fractions as floor fractions

Finally, $\sum_{i=l}^{r} \texttt{nums}[i]$ is the difference between the two

> prefix sums $\sum_{i=0}^{r}\texttt{nums}[i]$.

Reviewer: > the two prefix sums $\sum_{i=0}^{r}\texttt{nums}[i]$.

$\sum_{i=0}^{r}\texttt{nums}[i]$ and what?

<!-- partitioning into sqrt blocks (each block can have some sort of data structure ...)
 -->

We partition the array into $\sqrt N)$ blocks, where each block covers an
interval of size $\sqrt{N}$. For each block, there exists a corresponding
`update` and `query` operation.

**Update Queries:** $\mathcal{O}(1)$

To update an element at location $x$, we can find the corresponding block using

> the formula $\frac{x}{\texttt{blocksz}}$, and apply the corresponding difference

Reviewer 2: define blocksz

> Then, apply the corresponding difference between the element currently stored at

Reviewer: You can combine this with the sentence above into a single paragraph

**Sum Queries:** $\mathcal{O}(\sqrt{N})$

To perform a sum query from $[0\ldots r]$, calculate

$$

> \sum_{i = 0}^{R} \texttt{blocks}[i] + \sum_{\lfloor R \rfloor \cdot \texttt{blocksz}}^r \texttt{nums}[i]

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
\sum_{i = 0}^{R-1} \texttt{blocks}[i] + \sum_{R \cdot \texttt{blocksz}}^r \texttt{nums}[i]
```

\sum_{i = 0}^{R-1} \texttt{blocks}[i] + \sum_{R \cdot \texttt{blocksz}}^r \texttt{nums}[i]
$$

> where $\texttt{blocks}[i]$ represents the total sum of the $i$-th block and the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
where $\texttt{blocks}[i]$ represents the total sum of the $i$-th block, the
```

> where $\texttt{blocks}[i]$ represents the total sum of the $i$-th block, and $R$

Reviewer 2: define "the $i$-th block"

> $i$-th block represents the sum of the elements from the range

Reviewer 2: why don't you define what a block after line 32?

> represents $\frac{r}{\texttt{blocksz}}$. Since each of these blocks are of size

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$R=\left\lfloor\frac{r}{\texttt{blocksz}}\right\rfloor$. Since each of these blocks are of size
```

> $\sqrt{N}$, there can be at most $\sqrt{N}$ blocks.

Reviewer 2: well in your solution the blocks are of size floor(sqrt(N)), so there can be more than sqrt(N) blocks.

$[i\cdot \texttt{blocksz},(i + 1)\cdot \texttt{blocksz})$, and

> $R=\lfloor \frac{r}{\texttt{blocksz}} \rfloor$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$R=\left\lfloor \frac{r}{\texttt{blocksz}} \right\rfloor$.
```

> Finally, to find our total difference between $[l, r]$, we can perform two sum

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Finally, $\sum_{i=l}^{r} \texttt{nums}[i]$ is the difference between the two prefix sums $\sum_{i=0}^{r}\texttt{nums}[i]$ and $\sum_{i=0}^{l-1}\texttt{nums}[i]$
```

<!-- partitioning into sqrt blocks (each block can have some sort of data structure ...)
 -->

We partition the array into $\sqrt N)$ blocks, where each block covers an
interval of size $\sqrt{N}$. For each block, there exists a corresponding
`update` and `query` operation.

**Update Queries:** $\mathcal{O}(1)$

To update an element at location $x$, we can find the corresponding block using
the formula $\frac{x}{\texttt{blocksz}}$, and apply the corresponding difference
between the element currently stored at $x$, and the element we want to change
it to.

**Sum Queries:** $\mathcal{O}(\sqrt{N})$

To perform a sum query from $[0...r]$, calculate

$$

> \sum_{i = 0}^{r} \texttt{blocks}[i]

Reviewer 2: this isn't true?

Author: oop ommitted second half

	return ret;
}

ll query(int l, int r) {
	return query(r) - query(l - 1);
}

int main() {
	setIO();

	int n, q; cin >> n >> q;
	block_sz = (int) sqrt(n);

	for(int i = 0; i < n; ++i) cin >> nums[i];
	for(int i = 0; i < n; ++i) blocks[i / block_sz] += nums[i];
	for(int i = 0; i < q; ++i) {
		int t, l, r; cin >> t >> l >> r;
		if (t == 1) upd(l - 1, r);
		else cout << query(l, r) << "\n";
	}
}
```

</CPPSection>

</LanguageSection>

## Batching

See the CPH section on [batch processing](https://usaco.guide/CPH.pdf#page=263).

Maintain a "buffer" of the latest updates (up to $\sqrt N$). The answer for each
sum query can be calculated with prefix sums and by examining each update within
the buffer. When the buffer gets too large ($\ge \sqrt N$), clear it and
recalculate prefix sums.

<LanguageSection>

<CPPSection>

```cpp
//CodeSnip{CPP Short Template}

int n, q;
vi x;
vector<long long> cum;

void build() {
	cum = {0};
	for(const auto &t : x) cum.pb(cum.back() + t);
}

int main() {
	setIO(); cin >> n >> q;
	x.resize(n); for(int i = 0; i < n; i++) cin >> x[i];
	build();
	vector<pair<int, int>> upd;
	while(q--) {
		int t, a, b; cin >> t >> a >> b;
		if (t == 1) {

> 			a --;

Reviewer 3: a--

<!-- partitioning into sqrt blocks (each block can have some sort of data structure ...)
 -->

> We partition the array into $\sqrt N)$ blocks, where each block covers an

Reviewer 2: `$\sqrt N)$`

what does this mean?

> interval of size $\lfloor \sqrt{N} \rfloor$. For each block, there exists a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
interval of size $\texttt{blocksz}=\lfloor \sqrt{N} \rfloor$. For each block, there exists a
```

corresponding `update` and `query` operation.

**Update Queries:** $\mathcal{O}(1)$

> To update an element at location $x$, we can find the corresponding block using

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
To update an element at location $x$, first find the corresponding block using
```

the formula $\frac{x}{\texttt{blocksz}}$, where

> $\texttt{blocksz} = \lfloor \sqrt{N} \rfloor$ and apply the corresponding

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Then apply the corresponding
```

> difference between the element currently stored at $x$, and the element we want

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
difference between the element currently stored at $x$ and the element we want
```

to change it to.

**Sum Queries:** $\mathcal{O}(\sqrt{N})$

To perform a sum query from $[0\ldots r]$, calculate

$$
\sum_{i = 0}^{R-1} \texttt{blocks}[i] + \sum_{R \cdot \texttt{blocksz}}^r \texttt{nums}[i]
$$

where $\texttt{blocks}[i]$ represents the total sum of the $i$-th block and the
$i$-th block represents the sum of the elements from the range
$[i\sqrt{N},{(i + 1)}\sqrt{N})$, and $R$ represents

> $\frac{r}{\texttt{blocksz}}$.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
$R=\frac{r}{\texttt{blocksz}}$.
```

Finally, $\sum_{i=l}^{r} \texttt{nums}[i]$ is the difference between the two
prefix sums $\sum_{i=0}^{r}\texttt{nums}[i]$ and

> $\sum_{i=0}^{l-1}\texttt{nums}[i]$ queries for the quantity

Reviewer 2: isn't everything from "for the quantity" onwards redundant?

Author: yeah
